Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
pulmonary gas exchange and ventilation-perfusion relationships.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the principles of gas exchange by diffusion across the alveolar membrane.
Gas exchange in the lung occurs by passive diffusion of oxygen and carbon dioxide
across the blood-gas barrier, down their partial-pressure gradients,
and it is governed by Fick's law of diffusion.
The barrier is exquisitely suited to this: it is extremely thin,
less than a micrometre, and has a vast surface area, around seventy square metres.
Fick's law states that the rate of diffusion of a gas across a sheet is
proportional to the surface area, to the difference in partial pressure across it,
and to a diffusion constant for the gas,
and inversely proportional to the thickness of the barrier.
The diffusion constant itself depends on the gas's solubility and, inversely,
on the square root of its molecular weight — so that carbon dioxide,
being far more soluble, diffuses about twenty times more readily than oxygen
despite a similar molecular weight.
In health, the diffusion of oxygen is rapid,
and the blood is fully equilibrated with the alveolar gas in about a third of the
time it spends in the capillary — so there is a large reserve.
So gas exchange is by diffusion down partial-pressure gradients across the thin,
large blood-gas barrier, governed by Fick's law — proportional to area,
partial-pressure difference and a diffusion constant, and inversely to thickness;
carbon dioxide diffusing far more readily than oxygen by its solubility,
and oxygen normally equilibrating with a large reserve of time.
What limits the transfer of a gas — the distinction between diffusion and perfusion
limitation?
The transfer of a gas from the alveolus to the blood may be limited in one of two
ways — by perfusion or by diffusion — and the distinction depends on how quickly
the gas equilibrates between alveolus and blood.
A gas is perfusion-limited if it equilibrates rapidly between the alveolar gas and
the capillary blood, so that the partial pressures are equal well before the end of
the capillary; once equilibrated, no more gas can be taken up unless more blood
flows, so the only way to increase its uptake is to increase the perfusion — hence
perfusion-limited.
Oxygen in the normal lung, and the inert gas nitrous oxide, behave this way.
A gas is diffusion-limited if it does not fully equilibrate during the capillary
transit, so that a partial-pressure gradient persists to the end and the transfer
is limited by the diffusion process itself; carbon monoxide behaves this way,
because it is so avidly bound by haemoglobin that its partial pressure in the blood
stays low, maintaining the gradient — which is why it is used to measure the
diffusing capacity.
Oxygen can become diffusion-limited in disease or at altitude.
So a gas is perfusion-limited if it equilibrates quickly,
its uptake then raised only by more flow — as for oxygen normally and nitrous
oxide; or diffusion-limited if it fails to equilibrate,
limited by diffusion itself — as for carbon monoxide, and oxygen in disease;
a distinction central to understanding gas transfer.
Define the ventilation-perfusion ratio and explain its importance.
The ventilation-perfusion ratio is the ratio of the alveolar ventilation to the
pulmonary blood flow, for the whole lung or for a region,
and the matching of ventilation to perfusion is the most important factor in
determining the efficiency of gas exchange.
For the whole lung, the alveolar ventilation of about four litres a minute and the
cardiac output of about five give an overall ratio of around zero point eight.
Its importance is that effective gas exchange requires that ventilation and
perfusion be matched in each region:
ventilation delivers fresh gas and perfusion brings the blood,
and the ratio of the two determines the composition of the gas and the blood
leaving that region.
If the ratio is ideal, exchange is efficient.
Departures from the ideal — ventilation-perfusion mismatch — impair gas exchange
and are, in fact, the commonest cause of hypoxaemia in disease.
The two extremes are a ratio of zero — perfusion without ventilation,
a shunt — and a ratio of infinity — ventilation without perfusion, dead space.
So the ventilation-perfusion ratio is the ratio of alveolar ventilation to
perfusion, about zero point eight overall,
and its matching in each region is the chief determinant of the efficiency of gas
exchange; mismatch being the commonest cause of hypoxaemia,
with the extremes of shunt, a ratio of zero, and dead space, a ratio of infinity.
Describe the regional variation of the ventilation-perfusion ratio in the upright
lung.
In the upright lung, both ventilation and perfusion are affected by gravity and
increase from apex to base, but they do so to different degrees,
so that the ventilation-perfusion ratio itself varies down the lung.
Perfusion increases greatly from apex to base,
because the pulmonary arterial pressure is low and gravity adds a substantial
hydrostatic pressure at the base, so the base is much better perfused than the apex.
Ventilation also increases from apex to base,
for the reasons of regional compliance discussed, but less steeply than perfusion.
Because perfusion increases more than ventilation down the lung,
the ventilation-perfusion ratio is high at the apex — where ventilation exceeds
perfusion — and low at the base — where perfusion exceeds ventilation — passing
through the ideal value somewhere in between.
As a result, the apex has a higher oxygen and lower carbon dioxide tension than the
base. This regional variation is described by the ventilation-perfusion line on the
oxygen-carbon dioxide diagram.
So in the upright lung both ventilation and perfusion increase from apex to base,
but perfusion more steeply, so the ventilation-perfusion ratio is high at the apex
and low at the base; producing regional differences in gas tensions — a
gravitational variation that slightly impairs overall exchange and underlies the
effects of posture.
Describe the effects of shunt and of ventilation-perfusion mismatch on the arterial
gases.
Shunt and ventilation-perfusion mismatch both impair gas exchange and cause
hypoxaemia, but they have characteristically different effects,
particularly in their response to oxygen.
A shunt is blood that reaches the arterial side without being oxygenated — a
ventilation-perfusion ratio of zero — either through unventilated alveoli or
anatomically.
Its hallmark is that the resulting hypoxaemia responds poorly to supplemental
oxygen, because the shunted blood bypasses the alveoli entirely,
so no amount of raising the alveolar oxygen reaches it;
the well-ventilated alveoli cannot compensate because their blood is already nearly
fully saturated on the flat part of the dissociation curve.
Ventilation-perfusion mismatch — a spread of ratios — also causes hypoxaemia,
but this generally responds well to supplemental oxygen,
because raising the inspired oxygen raises the alveolar and hence arterial oxygen
even in the low-ratio units.
Carbon dioxide is usually less affected,
because the high-ratio units can compensate and ventilation is increased.
So a shunt, blood bypassing ventilated alveoli,
causes hypoxaemia that responds poorly to oxygen,
whereas ventilation-perfusion mismatch causes hypoxaemia that responds well to
oxygen; carbon dioxide being relatively preserved — a distinction that helps
identify the mechanism of hypoxaemia and guides its management.
Describe how oxygen and carbon dioxide tensions are determined in a lung region —
the oxygen-carbon dioxide diagram.
The composition of the gas and blood leaving a lung region is determined by its
ventilation-perfusion ratio, and this relationship is captured by the oxygen-carbon
dioxide diagram, which plots the oxygen tension against the carbon dioxide tension.
On this diagram, a line — the ventilation-perfusion line — connects two points
representing the extremes.
At one end is the point of inspired gas,
with a high oxygen and zero carbon dioxide,
representing a ventilation-perfusion ratio of infinity — ventilation without
perfusion, dead space, where the gas resembles inspired air.
At the other end is the point of mixed venous blood,
with a low oxygen and high carbon dioxide,
representing a ratio of zero — perfusion without ventilation, shunt,
where the blood is unchanged from venous.
Every real lung unit lies somewhere on the line between these extremes,
according to its ratio: a high ratio near the inspired-gas end,
with high oxygen and low carbon dioxide; a low ratio near the venous end.
The normal lung sits near the ideal point.
So the oxygen-carbon dioxide diagram represents how a region's gas tensions depend
on its ventilation-perfusion ratio,
along a line from the mixed-venous point — a ratio of zero,
shunt — to the inspired-gas point — a ratio of infinity, dead space;
every unit lying between according to its ratio,
a framework for understanding gas exchange and its disturbances.
How does the body respond to regional ventilation-perfusion mismatch?
The lung has a mechanism to improve the matching of ventilation and perfusion by
adjusting the perfusion to follow the ventilation — hypoxic pulmonary
vasoconstriction — which is an important and somewhat unusual response.
In most of the body, hypoxia causes vasodilatation,
but in the pulmonary circulation, a low alveolar oxygen tension causes the local
pulmonary arterioles to constrict.
The functional value is that it diverts blood flow away from poorly ventilated,
hypoxic regions of the lung — where perfusing them would be wasteful and would
lower the arterial oxygen — towards better-ventilated regions,
thereby improving the matching of perfusion to ventilation and limiting the fall in
arterial oxygen.
It is important in regional lung disease,
in one-lung ventilation during thoracic anaesthesia, and in the fetal circulation.
However, when hypoxia is global, as at altitude or with hypoventilation,
the response becomes widespread and raises the pulmonary arterial pressure.
Many anaesthetic agents, particularly the volatiles, inhibit it.
So the body responds to regional mismatch by hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction —
the constriction of pulmonary arterioles in poorly ventilated regions,
diverting blood to better-ventilated lung and improving matching;
important in lung disease and one-lung ventilation,
raising pulmonary pressure when hypoxia is global,
and inhibited by volatile anaesthetics.
What is the relevance of gas exchange and ventilation-perfusion matching to
anaesthesia?
Gas exchange and ventilation-perfusion matching are at the heart of anaesthesia,
because anaesthesia commonly disturbs them and hypoxaemia is a constant risk.
Anaesthesia impairs matching in several ways:
the atelectasis and airway closure from the reduced functional residual capacity
create regions of low ratio and shunt,
a major cause of the impaired oxygenation seen under anaesthesia;
and the inhibition of hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction by volatile agents worsens
this.
The distinction between shunt and mismatch guides the response to oxygen and the
use of positive end-expiratory pressure and recruitment to re-expand collapsed lung.
In thoracic anaesthesia, one-lung ventilation deliberately creates a large shunt,
managed using the knowledge of hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction.
The measurement of the alveolar-arterial oxygen difference assesses the efficiency
of exchange.
So gas exchange and ventilation-perfusion matching are central to anaesthesia:
anaesthesia causes atelectasis, shunt and impaired matching,
worsened by the inhibition of hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction;
the shunt-versus-mismatch distinction guides oxygen therapy and recruitment,
and the management of one-lung ventilation rests on these principles — making them
fundamental to maintaining oxygenation.
Pull it together: what determines the efficiency of gas exchange?
I would draw it together around the efficiency of gas exchange as depending on the
diffusion across the barrier and, above all,
on the matching of ventilation to perfusion.
Diffusion across the thin, large blood-gas barrier, governed by Fick's law,
is normally rapid and held in reserve,
oxygen being perfusion-limited and equilibrating well before the end of the
capillary; it is impaired only when the barrier is thickened or the time shortened.
The dominant determinant of efficiency, however,
is the matching of ventilation and perfusion: ideally matched,
exchange is efficient; mismatched, it is impaired,
with low-ratio units and shunt causing hypoxaemia,
and high-ratio units and dead space wasting ventilation.
The lung optimises matching by gravity's parallel effects and by hypoxic pulmonary
vasoconstriction. The arterial oxygen reflects the sum of these,
and the alveolar-arterial difference measures the inefficiency.
Anaesthesia disturbs both diffusion time and, especially, matching.
So the efficiency of gas exchange is determined by diffusion across the barrier —
normally rapid and in reserve — and chiefly by the matching of ventilation to
perfusion, optimised by hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction and disturbed by
mismatch, shunt and dead space; the alveolar-arterial difference measuring the
result — a synthesis central to respiratory physiology and anaesthesia.
State the alveolar gas equation and explain its use.
The alveolar gas equation calculates the partial pressure of oxygen in the
alveolus, which cannot be measured directly but is needed to understand oxygenation
and to derive the alveolar-arterial difference.
In words, the alveolar partial pressure of oxygen equals the partial pressure of
oxygen in the inspired gas, minus the alveolar carbon dioxide tension divided by
the respiratory quotient.
The inspired oxygen partial pressure is the fraction of inspired oxygen times the
barometric pressure less the saturated water vapour pressure,
since inspired gas is fully humidified.
The alveolar carbon dioxide is taken as the arterial value, which is measured,
and the respiratory quotient is about zero point eight.
The equation reveals the determinants of alveolar oxygen:
it is lowered by a low inspired oxygen fraction,
by a low barometric pressure as at altitude,
and by a raised carbon dioxide from hypoventilation — so hypoventilation lowers the
alveolar and arterial oxygen, an effect offset by giving supplemental oxygen.
So the alveolar gas equation gives the alveolar oxygen as the inspired oxygen
partial pressure minus the carbon dioxide tension over the respiratory quotient;
it shows how alveolar oxygen falls with low inspired oxygen,
altitude and hypoventilation, and provides the alveolar value needed to calculate
the alveolar-arterial difference — a central tool in assessing oxygenation.
Describe the causes of hypoxaemia.
Hypoxaemia — a low arterial oxygen — can be classified into several mechanisms,
a framework that directs diagnosis and is built on the physiology of gas exchange.
There are five classic causes.
First, a low inspired oxygen partial pressure,
as at altitude or from a faulty supply, lowering the alveolar and arterial oxygen.
Second, hypoventilation, which raises alveolar carbon dioxide and so,
by the alveolar gas equation, lowers the alveolar and arterial oxygen;
here the alveolar-arterial difference is normal.
Third, ventilation-perfusion mismatch, the commonest cause in disease,
where regions of low ratio lower the arterial oxygen; this responds to oxygen.
Fourth, a shunt, where blood bypasses ventilated alveoli;
this responds poorly to oxygen.
Fifth, a diffusion impairment, where the blood fails to equilibrate with alveolar
gas, important with a thickened barrier or reduced transit time.
The last three widen the alveolar-arterial difference.
So hypoxaemia is caused by a low inspired oxygen, hypoventilation,
ventilation-perfusion mismatch, shunt, or diffusion impairment;
the first two with a normal alveolar-arterial difference and the last three
widening it, and shunt responding poorly to oxygen — a classification that,
with the alveolar-arterial difference and the response to oxygen,
identifies the mechanism and guides treatment.
Describe the second gas effect and diffusion hypoxia, as seen with nitrous oxide.
Nitrous oxide, by virtue of its high solubility relative to nitrogen and its use in
high concentrations, produces two related phenomena that illustrate the principles
of gas exchange — the second gas effect on induction and diffusion hypoxia on
emergence.
The second gas effect occurs at the start of anaesthesia:
when a high concentration of nitrous oxide is given,
it is taken up into the blood rapidly and in large volume,
because it is relatively soluble; this rapid uptake shrinks the alveolar gas
volume, which concentrates the other gases present — the second gases,
including oxygen and any volatile agent — and draws more gas in,
so accelerating their uptake.
Diffusion hypoxia occurs at the end: when the nitrous oxide is discontinued,
the large volume that had dissolved in the blood now floods back out into the
alveoli, diluting the alveolar gas, including oxygen,
and lowering the alveolar oxygen tension; if the patient is breathing air,
this can cause transient hypoxaemia,
which is prevented by giving supplemental oxygen during emergence.
So nitrous oxide, by its volume of uptake,
causes the second gas effect — accelerating the uptake of other gases on induction
— and diffusion hypoxia — diluting alveolar oxygen as it floods out on emergence,
prevented by giving oxygen; both consequences of its solubility and high
concentration, illustrating alveolar gas dynamics.
Describe the three-compartment model of the lung and venous admixture.
The three-compartment model is a simplified,
conceptual representation of the lung used to analyse gas exchange,
dividing the imperfect real lung into three idealised compartments,
which helps quantify its inefficiency.
The three compartments are: an ideal compartment,
where ventilation and perfusion are perfectly matched and gas exchange is complete;
a dead-space compartment, which is ventilated but not perfused,
representing the wasted ventilation; and a shunt compartment,
which is perfused but not ventilated,
representing the blood that passes without being oxygenated.
The real lung's continuous spread of ventilation-perfusion ratios is thus reduced
to these three.
The concept of venous admixture, or physiological shunt,
expresses the total amount of deoxygenated,
venous-like blood that effectively mixes into the arterial blood — including both
the true shunt and the contribution of low-ratio units — calculated by the shunt
equation, which compares the oxygen contents of the ideal,
arterial and venous blood.
So the three-compartment model represents the lung as an ideal,
well-matched compartment, a dead-space compartment ventilated but not perfused,
and a shunt compartment perfused but not ventilated; and venous admixture,
the physiological shunt, is the total venous-like blood mixing into the arterial,
quantified by the shunt equation — a framework for analysing and quantifying the
inefficiency of gas exchange.
Describe the relationship between alveolar ventilation and the arterial carbon
dioxide.
The arterial carbon dioxide is determined by the balance between the carbon dioxide
produced by metabolism and that removed by alveolar ventilation,
and the relationship is a simple and fundamental inverse one.
At a steady state, the arterial carbon dioxide tension is proportional to the rate
of carbon dioxide production divided by the alveolar ventilation.
So, for a constant metabolic production,
the arterial carbon dioxide is inversely proportional to the alveolar ventilation:
doubling the alveolar ventilation halves the carbon dioxide,
and halving the ventilation doubles it.
This makes alveolar ventilation the sole physiological control of the arterial
carbon dioxide, and is the basis of the respiratory control of acid-base balance
and of the use of ventilation to manipulate carbon dioxide.
It is important that this concerns alveolar ventilation,
not total minute ventilation, since the dead-space ventilation does not contribute
to carbon dioxide removal — so an increase in dead space,
at constant minute ventilation, reduces effective alveolar ventilation and raises
the carbon dioxide.
So the arterial carbon dioxide is proportional to carbon dioxide production over
alveolar ventilation — inversely related to alveolar ventilation at constant
production; alveolar ventilation being the sole control of carbon dioxide,
and an increase in dead space reducing effective ventilation and raising it — the
basis of ventilatory control of carbon dioxide and acid-base balance.
Describe the diffusing capacity and how it is measured.
The diffusing capacity, or transfer factor,
is a measure of how readily a gas crosses the blood-gas barrier from the alveolus
to the blood, reflecting the conductance of the whole diffusion pathway,
and it is measured using carbon monoxide.
It is defined as the volume of gas transferred per minute per unit of
partial-pressure gradient across the barrier.
It depends on the properties described by Fick's law — the surface area,
the thickness of the barrier, and the diffusion properties of the gas — and also on
the volume and the binding capacity of the blood, that is the haemoglobin.
It is measured with carbon monoxide because carbon monoxide is diffusion-limited:
it is bound so avidly by haemoglobin that its partial pressure in the blood remains
effectively zero, so the rate of its uptake is determined purely by the diffusion
process, not by perfusion.
In the single-breath method, the patient inhales a low concentration of carbon
monoxide, holds the breath, and the uptake is calculated from the fall in its
concentration. The diffusing capacity is reduced by a thickened barrier,
by loss of surface area, and by anaemia.
So the diffusing capacity is the gas transferred per minute per unit
partial-pressure gradient, reflecting the diffusion pathway and the haemoglobin;
it is measured with carbon monoxide because, being diffusion-limited,
its uptake reflects diffusion alone — reduced by barrier thickening,
loss of area and anaemia, a measure of the lung's exchange capacity.
Describe the physiology of one-lung ventilation.
One-lung ventilation, used in thoracic anaesthesia to allow surgery on a collapsed
lung, deliberately creates a large shunt and challenges oxygenation,
and its management rests directly on the physiology of gas exchange and the
pulmonary circulation.
When one lung is intentionally collapsed and only the dependent lung is ventilated,
the non-ventilated lung continues to be perfused but is not ventilated,
creating a large right-to-left shunt — a ventilation-perfusion ratio of zero in
that lung — which would cause severe hypoxaemia if perfusion were unchanged.
Two mechanisms limit this. First, gravity: in the lateral position,
more of the blood flow goes to the dependent, ventilated lung.
Second, and crucially, hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction in the collapsed,
hypoxic lung diverts blood away from it towards the ventilated lung,
reducing the shunt.
Oxygenation is supported by ventilating the dependent lung with a high inspired
oxygen and appropriate settings, and hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction is
preserved by avoiding high concentrations of the volatile agents that inhibit it.
So one-lung ventilation creates a large shunt through the perfused but unventilated
lung, mitigated by gravity favouring the dependent lung and by hypoxic pulmonary
vasoconstriction diverting flow from the collapsed lung;
managed by a high inspired oxygen and by preserving hypoxic pulmonary
vasoconstriction — a direct application of gas-exchange and pulmonary-circulation
physiology to thoracic anaesthesia.
Summarise the assessment of oxygenation in the patient.
I would summarise it as the use of several complementary measures,
each illuminating a different aspect of the physiology,
to assess how well the patient is oxygenated and to identify the mechanism of any
impairment.
The arterial oxygen saturation, monitored continuously and non-invasively by pulse
oximetry, gives an immediate, practical measure,
though limited by the plateau of the dissociation curve and its other pitfalls.
The arterial oxygen tension, from a blood gas,
quantifies the oxygenation of the arterial blood more precisely.
To assess the efficiency of gas exchange,
the alveolar-arterial oxygen difference is calculated,
using the alveolar gas equation: a normal difference with hypoxaemia points to
hypoventilation or a low inspired oxygen,
while a widened difference indicates intrapulmonary causes — mismatch,
shunt or diffusion impairment.
The response to supplemental oxygen distinguishes shunt, which responds poorly,
from mismatch, which responds well. The oxygen content and delivery integrate these
with haemoglobin and cardiac output.
So oxygenation is assessed by pulse oximetry for continuous saturation,
the arterial oxygen tension for precision,
the alveolar-arterial difference and the response to oxygen to localise the
mechanism, and the oxygen content and delivery to integrate with the circulation —
a set of measures applying the physiology of gas exchange to the bedside assessment
of the patient.
Describe the physiology of apnoeic oxygenation.
Apnoeic oxygenation is the phenomenon whereby oxygenation of the blood can continue
during apnoea, without any breathing movements,
provided the airway is patent and supplied with oxygen,
and it is of great practical value in prolonging the safe duration of apnoea.
Its basis lies in the difference between the rates at which oxygen is removed from,
and carbon dioxide is added to, the alveoli.
During apnoea, oxygen continues to be taken up from the alveoli into the blood at
the metabolic rate, around two hundred and fifty millilitres a minute;
but carbon dioxide is not excreted at the same rate — only a small fraction of the
carbon dioxide produced reaches the alveoli,
the rest being buffered in the blood and tissues.
Consequently, the volume leaving the alveoli exceeds that entering,
creating a slight negative pressure that draws gas down from the pharynx into the
alveoli by mass flow; if that gas is oxygen,
oxygen is continuously delivered to the alveoli and taken up,
maintaining oxygenation.
The carbon dioxide, however, rises steadily,
and the apnoea is ultimately limited by this and by acidosis, not by hypoxia.
So apnoeic oxygenation maintains arterial oxygenation during apnoea because oxygen
uptake continues while carbon-dioxide excretion lags,
creating a mass flow of gas from pharynx to alveoli that delivers oxygen if the
airway is supplied with it; limited eventually by the rising carbon dioxide — the
basis of techniques to extend safe apnoea, such as nasal oxygen during intubation.
Describe the alveolar-arterial oxygen difference and its interpretation.
The alveolar-arterial oxygen difference is the difference between the calculated
partial pressure of oxygen in the alveolus and the measured partial pressure in the
arterial blood, and it is a valuable index of the efficiency of gas exchange,
distinguishing the causes of hypoxaemia.
The alveolar oxygen is calculated from the alveolar gas equation,
and the arterial oxygen is measured from a blood gas; the difference between them,
normally small — a few millimetres of mercury in a young person breathing air,
widening somewhat with age and with a higher inspired oxygen — reflects the small
normal degree of ventilation-perfusion scatter and shunt.
Its interpretation is the key. A normal difference in the presence of hypoxaemia
indicates that the lung itself is exchanging normally and the cause lies outside it
— hypoventilation, or a low inspired oxygen.
A widened difference indicates an intrapulmonary cause of the hypoxaemia —
ventilation-perfusion mismatch, shunt,
or a diffusion impairment — because these prevent the arterial oxygen from reaching
the alveolar value.
So the alveolar-arterial oxygen difference,
the gap between the calculated alveolar and the measured arterial oxygen,
is normally small; a normal value with hypoxaemia points to hypoventilation or low
inspired oxygen, while a widened value points to an intrapulmonary cause —
mismatch, shunt or diffusion impairment — making it a key tool in diagnosing the
mechanism of hypoxaemia.
Describe the shunt equation in words.
The shunt equation quantifies the proportion of the cardiac output that behaves as
a shunt — the venous admixture — by applying the principle of conservation of mass
to the oxygen carried by the blood,
and it can be expressed and understood entirely in words.
The principle is that the total oxygen delivered in the arterial blood must equal
the sum of the oxygen carried by the blood that passed through ideal,
well-oxygenated lung and the oxygen carried by the shunted blood that bypassed it.
From this balance, the shunt fraction — the ratio of the shunted flow to the total
cardiac output — is given by the difference between the oxygen content of ideal
end-capillary blood and that of arterial blood,
divided by the difference between the oxygen content of ideal end-capillary blood
and that of mixed venous blood.
In words, the shunt fraction is the deficit of oxygen in the arterial blood
compared with ideal blood, expressed as a proportion of the total
arterial-to-venous oxygen difference.
The end-capillary content is calculated from the alveolar oxygen,
and the mixed venous content requires a sample from a pulmonary artery catheter.
So the shunt equation, derived from the conservation of oxygen,
gives the shunt fraction as the difference in oxygen content between ideal and
arterial blood, divided by the difference between ideal and mixed venous blood —
quantifying, in words, the venous admixture as the proportional oxygen deficit of
the arterial blood, a measure of the lung's inefficiency.
Describe the determinants of the mixed venous oxygen content and its significance.
The mixed venous oxygen, the oxygen content or tension of the blood returning to
the right heart and entering the lungs,
is an important global indicator of the balance between oxygen delivery and
consumption in the body, and its determinants follow from the Fick principle.
The mixed venous blood is the pooled venous return from all the tissues,
so its oxygen reflects what is left after the tissues have extracted their oxygen.
By the Fick principle, the oxygen consumed equals the cardiac output times the
difference between the arterial and the mixed venous oxygen contents; rearranged,
the mixed venous content depends on the arterial oxygen content and on the ratio of
oxygen consumption to cardiac output.
So the mixed venous oxygen falls — indicating greater extraction — when delivery
falls relative to demand: with a fall in cardiac output,
in arterial oxygen content, or in haemoglobin,
or with a rise in oxygen consumption;
and rises when delivery exceeds demand or extraction is impaired, as in sepsis.
It is therefore used as a measure of the adequacy of the circulation and of global
oxygen balance.
So the mixed venous oxygen reflects the balance of oxygen delivery and consumption,
falling when cardiac output, arterial oxygen or haemoglobin fall or when
consumption rises, by the Fick principle;
a global indicator of the adequacy of oxygen delivery,
valuable in monitoring the critically ill and the adequacy of the circulation.
How does the cardiac output affect the arterial oxygen in the presence of a shunt?
The cardiac output has an important and perhaps unexpected influence on the
arterial oxygen when a shunt is present,
through its effect on the oxygen content of the shunted, mixed venous blood,
an interaction of the circulation and gas exchange.
When there is a fixed shunt, a portion of the cardiac output bypasses the lung and
arrives in the arterial blood with the oxygen content of mixed venous blood;
the arterial oxygen is therefore a mixture of well-oxygenated end-capillary blood
and this venous blood.
Now, if the cardiac output falls while oxygen consumption is unchanged,
the tissues extract more oxygen from each unit of blood,
so the mixed venous oxygen content falls;
consequently the shunted blood is more desaturated,
and when it mixes into the arterial blood it lowers the arterial oxygen further —
so a fall in cardiac output worsens the hypoxaemia from a shunt,
independently of any change in the lung.
Conversely, raising the cardiac output raises the mixed venous oxygen and lessens
the effect of the shunt. This coupling means the arterial oxygen depends not only
on the lung but on the circulation.
So in the presence of a shunt, a fall in cardiac output lowers the mixed venous
oxygen by increasing extraction, so the shunted blood is more desaturated and the
arterial oxygen falls further; thus cardiac output affects arterial oxygenation
independently of the lung — an important coupling of the circulation and gas
exchange in the critically ill.
Why is carbon dioxide rarely diffusion-limited, unlike oxygen?
Carbon dioxide is rarely if ever diffusion-limited in its transfer across the
blood-gas barrier, even when oxygen transfer is impaired,
and the reason lies in the much greater diffusibility of carbon dioxide,
a consequence of its solubility.
By Fick's law, the rate of diffusion of a gas depends, among other things,
on its diffusion constant, which is proportional to the solubility of the gas in
the tissue and inversely to the square root of its molecular weight.
Carbon dioxide and oxygen have similar molecular weights,
but carbon dioxide is about twenty times more soluble than oxygen;
so carbon dioxide diffuses across the barrier roughly twenty times more readily
than oxygen.
Consequently, even when the barrier is thickened by disease,
or the time for diffusion is reduced,
carbon dioxide still equilibrates rapidly and completely between blood and
alveolus, whereas oxygen may fail to.
This is why, in diseases that thicken the barrier,
the transfer of oxygen is impaired — causing hypoxaemia — before that of carbon
dioxide; indeed, carbon dioxide elimination is generally limited by ventilation
rather than by diffusion.
So carbon dioxide is rarely diffusion-limited because it is about twenty times more
soluble than oxygen and so diffuses that much more readily,
equilibrating rapidly even across a thickened barrier; whereas oxygen,
far less soluble, becomes diffusion-limited in disease — the reason a diffusion
impairment causes hypoxaemia long before it affects carbon dioxide.
Describe absorption atelectasis and the role of inspired oxygen.
Absorption atelectasis is the collapse of lung distal to a poorly ventilated or
closed airway owing to the absorption of the trapped alveolar gas into the blood,
and breathing a high concentration of oxygen markedly accelerates it,
a phenomenon important in anaesthesia.
The mechanism is that, behind an airway that is closed or nearly closed — as occurs
in the dependent lung under anaesthesia — the gas in the alveoli is no longer
replenished, and is steadily absorbed into the blood,
because the total gas pressure in the venous blood is slightly less than
atmospheric; as the gas is absorbed, the alveoli shrink and collapse.
The composition of the trapped gas determines the rate:
if the alveoli contain nitrogen, which is poorly soluble and slow to be absorbed,
collapse is slow; but if they contain a high concentration of oxygen,
which is rapidly taken up by the blood,
the gas is absorbed quickly and collapse is rapid.
So breathing a high inspired oxygen,
by replacing the slowly-absorbed nitrogen with rapidly-absorbed oxygen,
promotes absorption atelectasis — a reason why very high inspired oxygen
concentrations can worsen atelectasis and shunt.
So absorption atelectasis is the collapse of lung behind a closed airway as the
trapped gas is absorbed into the blood;
it is accelerated by a high inspired oxygen,
because oxygen is absorbed far faster than the nitrogen it replaces — a
consideration in the use of high oxygen concentrations under anaesthesia,
balanced against the need to prevent hypoxaemia.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Gas exchange is by passive diffusion down partial-pressure gradients across
the thin (<1 µm), large (~70 m²) blood-gas barrier,
governed by Fick's law (rate ∝ area × partial-pressure difference × diffusion
constant ÷ thickness); CO2 diffuses ~20× more readily than O2 by its solubility,
and O2 normally equilibrates with a large time reserve.
Second, Transfer is perfusion-limited if the gas equilibrates quickly (O2 normally,
nitrous oxide — uptake then raised only by more flow) or diffusion-limited if it
fails to equilibrate (carbon monoxide, used to measure diffusing capacity;
O2 in disease/altitude).
Third, The ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) ratio (alveolar ventilation ÷ perfusion,
~0.8 overall) and its regional matching is the chief determinant of gas-exchange
efficiency; mismatch is the commonest cause of hypoxaemia,
with extremes of shunt (V/Q = 0) and dead space (V/Q = ∞).
In the upright lung both ventilation and perfusion rise apex-to-base but perfusion
more steeply, so V/Q is high at the apex and low at the base.
Fourth, Shunt (blood bypassing ventilated alveoli) causes hypoxaemia that responds
poorly to oxygen; V/Q mismatch causes hypoxaemia that responds well to oxygen;
CO2 is relatively preserved.
The O2-CO2 diagram plots a V/Q line from the mixed-venous point (V/Q = 0) to the
inspired-gas point (V/Q = ∞), each unit lying between according to its ratio.
Fifth, Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction diverts blood from poorly ventilated
regions to improve matching (important in lung disease and one-lung ventilation;
raises pulmonary pressure when hypoxia is global; inhibited by volatile agents).
Anaesthesia causes atelectasis, shunt and impaired matching — the shunt-vs-mismatch
distinction guiding oxygen, PEEP and recruitment.
Thank you. That concludes the station.